33
Compare carisimo, the world is already not only old, but decrepit, and everything tends towards its end. You see where things are. No <n> there is another nisi bene agere et letari . I comfort you that you do everything you can to keep your family in need.
I have a letter from our Giovanni Batista , who apologizes to you and recommends that you pray to God for him, that he is in a state of alienation due to these unfortunate cases of his. Do it, and he begs you to tell Brother Batista to do the same for his brothers; and if Friar Nicholò is there , please do it for us and make it easy for those novices in whom he has great faith. Do it that his virtues deserve every good.
I wish that sometimes you write me a verse and no <n> you forget who doesn't forget you. Remind you of the spiritual consolations we have served together and come back to us, and don't <n> forget about yourselves. May the all-powerful God wish things to have a good end, for I cannot see it: I nescio an simus digni hate vel love . God help us.
Sometimes it is not serious to inscribe me a verse, which I am here in tera oblivionis . These farmers make their own. Here, taken a mile away, a boy died of the disease and an old one who used to work at Sancta Maria Nuova did the same. They are distant from us and the houses are as if crowded not far [?] from the cape in the woods. Let me know what belongs to Bartolomeo and where it is. I recommend you.
34
Compare dear, I have your letter and I see you for that Sunday in Fiesole. Having known, I would have come. Was there on Wednesday morning and found Cedarno [?] . I wanted to stay there in the evening; then Lorenzo de' Medici sent for him and I come to trouble for a world and entered an abyss that I want God to grant us salvation of soul and body, which I doubt very much.
I am very pleased having heard from your letter how you go to Vila Magna to stay there for a while. You would do well to keep yourself with your family, who not only need it, but are in need of it. I am tempted to be wise and to oppose one's health to all the things in the world, which are things that are not done except once. I like you to go to Sancto Marcho on the matter of Giovanni Batista , which is a pious work, and you do the same, because his goodness deserves it and there are few like him. When you are in Vila Magna, let me know and let me know if Leonardo Nasi , son of Pietro di Lutozo , is there , because if you are not there <n> wanting to return there will be in concert with him.
I don't know what one has to do with our affairs, seeing so much persecution come against us, all founded on our sins and shortcomings; and persevering in it as we do , I don't know what we can hope for, if not badly, because if the cause is not removed, the effects can hardly be removed. May the almighty God keep his holy hands on our heads and do not look at our iniquities or our sins, but turn towards us his usual mercy.
Pierfilippo told me how mona Gostanza and those boys were discussing getting married, but that he was surprised and didn't like it <n> at all. It started out that it was necessary to think first of whether they had taken it.


35
Vespasian , Ser Lionardo comes there. I ask you to be happy to make me, you and Leonardo , an end until this day, as Ser Lionardo will tell you . I sold the fifty-eight florins of Monte and placed the condition to Francescho Panc <i> atichi and Guido (as you know, that I did everything with your consent) and sold some things here in the house, as it was that sort of cloths were sold , which appeared sold for me, and the room. Of all these things I have made good account. I don't want to have them to dispute anymore.
And I also beg you to repay the one hundred and thirty-two large florins that I owe to Jachopo di Francescho del Mazante bechaio and you sureties, that it be clarified that I have nothing to do with said debt; and of this I beg you. And if Leonardo did n't want to do it, he would make me win admiration. So let me do it, and I will always be prepared to do you, and to one and the other, every pleasure.

37
Most illustrious Prince and Most Excellent Lord , after the humble recommendation, etc.
I haven't written to your Lordship for more time now, just seeing you in so many occupations of the sponge of Otranto. Now then it has pleased the most merciful God to have given you so much victory, it can be said that this victory not only belongs to the Majesty of the King and to Your Lordship, but of all the Christiani, since the offense was universal and not particular: however all the Christiani should rejoice in so much benefit received. In this city there could not have been greater rejoicing than has been done universally throughout the city with sounds and lights and processions to the most merciful God of so much benefit received. And this case is valued all the more when it is the universal judgment of all connoisseurs that not only in the time of the moderns, but of the ancients, the most worthy defense of this, nor the most powerful offense, was ever made. Because if Your Lordship consider what Numantia's offense was and what their defense was, where the Romans stayed in camp for a long time, there were no bombards or pushers or brooms or many species of war instruments that were in this city, and Numantia was not they bought only when those of the earth wanted. The same can be said of Sagunto, two such famous captures. Nor did the Greeks ever have any similar to this one, because you see Alexandro Magno, according to what Quintus Curtius writes, who, finding himself in a field in a town, threw himself walls in his own town where there were no shelters or anything. As can be seen of the moderns of our times, the Duke Francescohe went into the field at Gradara with a very powerful army, and after several months that he remained there he rose up in shame, and did not acquire it; and he was not defended in the form that Otranto was defended. It could be said of Verona when Duke Filippo bought it and that Nicolò Piccino entered it, who did it without any difficulty, where he was not injured or killed in person.
Then Duke Francesco came there, and since Duke Filippo did not send assistance to Nicolò Piccino , despairing and he and those of the earth, they put Duke Francesco inside , and without taking his sword from its sheath, he captured it. Here is the purchase of Brescia made for Count Carimignola : after a very long siege he bought it, but not with as much difficulty as your Lordship has bought . Duke Francesco went to camp in Milan, where there was a government without any order, and he stayed there for a longer time; then in the time that he was in utter despair, and it did not seem to him that he could buy it, he decided to get out of the field, finding himself in a very great mess of money and everything, and he had written letters about this here in Florence, which are from the Melanesians then without government and without individual order, due to the pride of the Venetians who did not want to take the lands of Lombardy with the conditions duke Filippo hadthe Melanesians became desperate because the Venetians had abandoned them and did not provide them with food or anything, and there was very great hunger; and all this the Venetians did, believing they had led him to a place where they were needed to give themselves up, and he made a mistake, because as if in despair, when Duke Francesco was completely in despair of the hope of having it, they called him inside and they told him yes . So this land he had without any difficulty.
If someone writes this assault in the way it was, and the difficulty was able to acquire it, and the defense was made by Your Lordship and the offense against the enemies, and it will be written in the proper way that it is, it will not be inferior neither to the deeds of the ancients, nor to those of the moderns, making a comparison of this with their deeds, as has been said.
Your Lordship remains in great glory and reputation, besides the universal good it will follow, because this can be said to have been done precisely by virtue and prudence of Your Lordship , that you have not forgiven either hardships or inconveniences, and put your person more times at the risk of one's life. I, as a servant of Your Lordship , have said and will say the same thing I wrote in several places; and as a servant of Your Most Illustrious LordshipI was as happy about it as I've heard about it for a very long time; and so I believe they have done all your servants, for the honor and reputation it follows to your Lordship , to which I commend myself as much as I can.

40
Giovanni , I have written a letter to Lucha degl'Albizi < which> will be with this: send it, and send it for Bastiano . Great amplified very chon of <r> i openly what I mean. I know that the greatest famine affects both men and those who tell them the truth. You know that pope Nichola used to say that he considered himself guilty of not letting anyone enter the threshold of the door of his room who spoke the truth of what he meant; and Pope Piushe said that everyone went willingly to Lodi and Piacenza, but that there was no one in Verona who wanted to go . In order not to honor Lucha and Alesandro in this error, I went to Verona.
Yesterday I wrote about the petition, that it would not be won, and that Bernardo would speak to you temperately, and question it once or twice; and so I understand that he did. Antonio Corsini must have gone back to sleep at home, it is a shame that the Signoria is led to make sense of the Colleges. Nofri Seristori says that he goes on the way to Fra Girolamo and has not understood the Gonfaloniere. See where we are led! God must be the one to deal with these things himself, since men are not <n> they are sufficient to be able to make them. Woe to that city that comes into the hands of the people: that you see that Aristotle condemns it, and puts it mostly in the worst government that there is, and calls it the scum of the people, in Latin fes popularis ; and we are in it up to the eye! Civil wars are the worst thing a city has to do, from which followed the ruin of Rome, and from here were born Marius and Silla who ruined Rome, that you see that twenty thousand citizens were killed with one sound of a trumpet. These discords are seen and where civil discords originate, because, as Petrarcha says, that this is the custom of citizens, that one inflames the other, and from here civil wars are born. This principle has already arrived in Florence. And if you look for the origin of these wars, you will find that their defects are of each citizen for himself. Followed the Petrarcha: And if you will seek me its origin, you will find that its root is in the errors and defects of each citizen for himself . One thing followed <which> is what I warn you about: that you take care that you are not one of those who feed the civil fire with your blowing and your wood; think if you know anyone in Florence who does this art. Note well the words of Petrarcha about the discord of citizens, and I believe that, in the world it is not the mag <i>bad hours of this; and therefore see what he says: Of the evils of the world, each evil is more to be mourned than civil evil , even as it seems from many serious writers that no one else can be called evil, considering civil evil. In the discords of citizens, one wants to be a mediator to seek peace among them; and if this does not apply, at least keep the part of the freedom and justice of your city, if you should all remain alone. A city, that is Rome, can give you the exemption.In the quarrels of the cities, when a citizen is confined, it seems to be his own harm; but whoever considers it well, c <i> ò is to the detriment of all citizens.This of this letter that I have written to you can be reputed to be something miraculous. Having signed up for a part and going to my room, on one side I found a life of what I am writing to you about Petrarcha which <n> could be more apropos <which> is the things going around. If Cavalcante understood what I wrote to you, I would say show him it ; but he wouldn't <n> mean it. Enjoy the things there are, which are about the present times. A tte I recommend.

42
Pierfilippo , I wrote to you in August for another letter of mine, and that I will now mean to you: what you are doing is not out of ignorance, but on the contrary. I remind you that life is given by God as a grace, and death as a punishment for sin. In all men, as you know, this natural desire to live is, and in order to pursue this effect it is necessary to do everything with it.
I don't know where all the opposition is born in you in all your operations, that this desire seems to be not only instinctive in you , but dead, and there are infinite proofs of this. First, the <n> thousand fantasies of the continuous occupation, in which the day and the night are never bad <n> for each other, and full of a thousand ravings of stuff, of states, in such a way that you not only have a vacant hour of time , but you don't have a moment. It is necessary, this weak, fragile, helpless body to help <r> him and no <n> put such a burden on him <that> no < you can carry it and you won't get in the way: and then you can complain about yourself, and not about him; the effort, so much that it lasts. I think the main object is for honor and profit; and I wanted this profit and honor not only for you, but also for your children , for whom they have made you put on your shoulders for a large part of this burden. For all these reasons mentioned above, for which you tire yourself, living is necessary, and this cannot be done if you do not lift these burdens from your shoulders and then <n> those who are servants of natureand in whom are not the dowries are in you, which you have acquired with sweat and toil; and it is very sad that they are lost so vilely and for such a vile thing in you, in which great fruits awaited the fatherland which gave birth to you: from you, who see in how much penury she has come and goes every day.
Now, in order to return from whence I left, to want <r> to relieve some of these burdens <that> it has, it is necessary to remove yourself from Florence and come here to this pleasant and sweet place, where woods, worthy mountains, springs, torrents , clear rivers await you, and they call you that you do not delay any longer, as time passes; the trees say that they keep leaves for you, that you come forward lose them <no> . Here <is> a room waiting for you, which will be yours and mine, and has many worthy prerogatives: one, which did not dwell in it never a single thought that prevented you not only for an hour, but for a moment; there is another, which is the preserver of life and vital spirits: this is that women never lodged in us , who are the destruction of our life. Here is yet another species, which is not a species of animals that keep you from falling asleep, neither mosquitoes nor the like; the air in such a form, that every body, however weak or infirm, immediately regains its pristine strength. And to give you a taste or taste of some of these cities, yesterday Bernardo Jachopi and I went to the highest mountains of these countries, where we sawall of the Valdarno and up to Pisa, all the ispazata chanpagnia. All this is full of pleasant springs, and at the top was a very large plain where we find chon pechore shepherds. Then we go near a wood, in a break in a mountain all full of trees around, and in this break we find a church, where we find the priest; and immediately a great fire lit and, having set the tables, he set the table with white tablecloths, and brought in delicious fruits and an old wine of the most solemn ones I have drunk this year. And he won't tell you the charezes and grateful welcomes he gave us! Let's go up to chavalo around 22 o'clock and be on this very high mountain . Wing back we call you and Bernardoand I countless times, detesting the patience of men.
We go down this mountain; and then having descended about a half mile or more, we came to a farmer's house where there was a worthy spring with stone tablets. We wanted to have breakfast and we didn't want a very solemn wine, since all this mountain was full of it <li> sima, you can't go to the bonfire.
Having left this farmer's house, we come to the Localo house, id est to the Franciescho Nori house , and there we see fountains, nurseries and enormous abundances of water, hanging gardens, newly made chapels, walls made by force with great magnificence.
Leaving from here, we come to the house Galeotto Cei , which is about half a mile away; and we find it in a pleasant meadow near a well, with the wife and children and the wife of Agostino Biliotti , who all gave us great affection and wanted us to drink a very kind wine. To Jailbird we do not want to, but we take leave from him and we have long discussions of your affairs, making a firm resolution that you should come now, making time and already feeling good. Called, prayed, exhorted, come and do not linger, for if you taste these sweet foods of the vila, any other food will seem bitter to you.
It's worth. And take care in this letter that the Capitudes do not vegan it, so that they do not become envious. And another filiality is in this case, which I won't <n> keep silent about: that here one will never g <i> uchò nor g <i> uchò ag <i> uocho ignuno: that it is not esteemed <r> the little. Iterum is valid.


