10
Nicholas Perottus , Bishop of Sipontinus , greet Vespasian .
Egregie tanquam frater, I have received your letter and understood what you write. In fact Homero , I am sending you the letter on behalf of Our Lord . Present it yourself, and tell him that Our Lord is writing to you, ask for the said book to have it written, and so on. By God, if you ever please me, do this to me: have it written in octo dì, as you say. And bind it in papers , glue it covered with leather , and send it to me immediately. But, as you say, let each one see his quarter of him again, so that it is not false.
The money for binding it will be at my expense; and do it secretly, as you say. Parmi una hora mille, for good respect. It makes me sad that Lives are needed for two hands ; but still, since it's done, make every effort that I have it soon.
I have all the books you write about, except Politics , which if you can get it for 8 ducats , send it immediately to Messer Giuliano Coppino and give him the money. I don't want to spend more than 8 ducats.
If you have to give it for eight, send it early, because on Monday, that is, at the 28th of this year, I must start reading it. If you can send Cesare's Commentaries up to here, I would love it, with this: that, if I like them, I should remove them ; I don't like it, pay the carrier and send them back.
I cannot send my Polibio , because I have only one squad , and with that I have one written for Signor Malatesta of Cesena , and one for Messer Piero of Noceto . If you thought you could write to messer Giuliano Coppino to ask you to write a current letter here, I would lend him the example . For many occupations I cannot wait for them. Christo look at you.

9
Egregie tanquam frater dearest. Because you say you haven't received the letter of exchange, which makes me very surprised, I am sending you another enclosed here for 18 florins large , as you ask. So remove the Epistles and bind them again, and have them covered either with black or black , printed as beautifully as possible , and send me the expense, and I will immediately send you the money. If you ever bind book well , do this be it. But above all, I beg you to have it soon, because I have great need of it. And have it handed over to Messer Giuliano Coppino .
It amazes me that by now el Donato isn't finished. Tell me in particular in what terms it is, both it and the other two, and for God's sake ask him.
I would like to know if there could be found someone who could write and represent well that Geometry and Music , and who could cover all the expense.
Item if Donato above Terentio is found there . Item I would like you to send me an inventory of all Plutarch's Lives <which> are traducte chosti . Since Geometry could not be written about , if it were possible for you to have it early for some time here it would be a very singular grace to me.
I don't need anything else. I am ready for all your pleasures. Expecto the Epistles with longing.
