17
I am more than that I had finished the first Decha and only a choprilla remained for me . I had made some chordovan tigniere and they hadn't succeeded in my way; and for this reason I had told Gentile to bring one of them to Chafagiuolo. You told me do it; so it needs, if you want it to finish, have this skin , which you would already have finished, having helped it.
I am waiting for Prinio every day to send him to me. This is here, it's almost illuminated and the chontinovo is being made. I think it will be finished in the coming week, and as soon as I have it, I will finish everything I have to do.
The Lives continue the same with the great difficulty there is <a> to have these blessed exenpri ; nothing missing I do anything that you don't have to stay, and that this book has an expedition. I'm waiting for Ferara three from Guerino that I missed, that you have had them written to me, and that you will receive them , and immediately <that> will be finished he will send them.
Alamanno is busy translating that of Agis and Cleomenes , and has been a part of it; He says at the beginning it was difficult, now it's very easy, and he'll get it done as soon as possible.
If you like nothing else I have to do, let me know and I'll do it with good will. I recommend to you.
18
A very clear and eloquent man, after the recommendation and the rest.
Prinio has finished illuminating , and he has illuminated everything very well and richly in such a way < that> it now appears as a magnificent book as he is. I am now waiting to give him an expedition, to this and to the third Decha , and I will finish it as soon as possible; but I don't want to pretend, in four or five days, that they suit him.
I did the chonto chonto Prinio illuminated this and I did chonto save that it was possible, more than if I had had a lot to do for myself. Get him to tell him the money he did: I wrote him my own hand of everything we agreed on. About a year ago he underwent an Istatio Tebaidos , of which some remain to be paid, which I remind him of in the said inscription of which we remain in agreement.
Meser Piero followed the addition of the fourth Decha del chontinovo and Meser Marcho le Vite ; and then we will be at the end of all the books, for the grace of God. I recommend to you.
19
A very clear and eloquent man, after the recommendation.
The Prinio and the Decha are all finished in good shape , so I think you will like them extremely. They were asked up there but at the door they wouldn't let me come. Send a chon some cloth to wrap him, so that they don't spoil. Meser Piero Strozi has finished the abbreviation and has given Pipo <che> the minî , and they will immediately bind . I recommend to you.
2
Vespasian to Philip Podaghaterus of Cyprus most greetings.
Your letter, dearest Philip , pleases me very much , not only because they are written with such ease, that they are in no way averse to the old way of letters, but also because when I see them , the sweetest memory of our friendship always recurs in my mind.
But to my superiors I informed thee, Florence, that there was no one who wrote to pieces . Indeed, the scribes were to be found for the volumes in the agreement desired, that is, that each side should contain fifty lines, and each verse should contain seventy elements.
The price of one volume would be six grand . The writer 's letter is preferable to yours, the form of which I would certainly have sent with this letter , had not some occupations prevented me. So decide whatever you think, then make something of your plan.
Further, so that you may understand that I am diligently watching over your affairs, I inform you that I have, indeed, with the utmost labor of the lactating over Statius , the best of course and improved . The format of the script is quick and easy . So write down what is to be done.
But of our Robert I do not know what to say; for after he departed from us I never had any letters.
I only know from the King's Steward of England that he labored for a long time with an illness I do not know, and that he was at last reduced to good health. If it is worth the impression, I am very happy.

20
Reverend in Christ, Father and Lord, humble commendation premised and the rest.
A few days have passed since I gave a letter to your Lordship and indicated to them how I had consigned to Gerozo de Pillis four volumes of the Commentaries of St. Jerome on both the New and the Old Testament : which indeed I managed with the greatest difficulty to have them transcribed. I thought that beyond the true price I should receive from your Lordship some reward and gift for my labor; but I have not only obtained this, but I lack the true value and capital; and in this matter I am satisfied, not as I ought, but as I can.
I had begun Jerome's commentary on Isaiah , and now it is finished. If your Lordship wants it as contained in the note delivered to me , written in your Lordship 's own hand - I expect to be informed. For in that note it is contained that, beyond the Commentary on Ezekiel which your Lordship said he had with him, I would make others on the Holy Scripture inclusive on the Old and New Testaments .
Moreover, there remain in my hands the aforesaid Jerome on Isaiah , and on Matthew and Mark ; and for these two the price must still be paid to me: concerning which I beseech your Lordship to make my debt become due, so that I may well earn from your Lordship and report the same praises, as has happened up to this time. And if your Lordship wishes to remain on the Holy Scriptures , I am prepared to provide that your Lordship has what no one else in Italy ever had or has. I beseech your Lordship abovethat Eusebius Panphilus should provide for him on the preparation of the Gospel : for if you want it, I have the best and will transmit it as soon as possible.
I commend myself very much to your Lordship.
25
In the name of Vespasian to be balanced against Alphonsus Palentinus .
A certain relative of the Reverend Father and Prince of Spain recently returned to me your most elegant letter, from which I took no small amount of pleasure in my heart. For they renewed the memory of our friendship, by which, during the lifetime of Pope Nicholas, we were so bound and united to each other, that I am convinced that there is no distance, either time or place, which can be subject to this mutual benevolence. For the distance of places, as Aristotle says, takes away the use of friendship, but does not take away friendship . You know about yourself, I will testify about myself. These are your virtues, your humanity, these merits in me, so that as long as I live I cannot be oblivious to you.
But if there was ever any time in which this city of ours pleased you or any one else, it now undoubtedly appears to be such that that Florence, which was so approved by you in that storm of which you write, now surpasses it without controversy in every class of arts.
In the first place, the study of literature has never been more vigorous in this city, and many adolescents and many young men are found here educated in Greek and Latin literature, most of them even so equipped with Aristotelian and Platonic studies, that they seem to have been educated in the Academy. For Argyropylus Byzantius came to this city immediately after the death of Pope Nicholas, a man of genius and learning, and worthy of that ancient Greece, who for many years educated the Florentine youth not only in Greek literature, but also in those arts which seem to pertain to a good and happy life. And so he taught and taught philosophy, both about life and manners, and also about nature, with the utmost elegance in the fashion of the ancients. Aristotle wrote several books in Latin. Plato's opinions and that secret and hidden discipline he carefully opened up, not without the great admiration of his audience. And so certain young men, who had formerly been eminently learned in Latin letters, having now added Greek and philosophic studies to the method of writing, managed to produce some works, indeed the most elegant and worthy of the knowledge of all.
Moreover, this city of ours is becoming more beautiful and more beautiful every day with new buildings. It is incredible to say with what earnestness the citizens turned their minds to constructing fine houses and erecting public edifices. CosmosThe most famous man himself builds now private houses, now sacred halls, now monasteries, both in the city and outside the city, at such great expense, that they seem to equal the magnificence of the ancients, either Emperors or Kings. Moreover, he built an excellent library and collected books from all over the world. Now I have a great number of librarians, who, receiving payment from him, write both gentile and sacred books. Greek books, too, are sought for on every side, which that great man procures with the greatest care, not only that they may be glorified for himself, and that they may be an ornament to the city, but also that they may help the industry of learned men. Thus Florence flourishes more than ever before, not only in the study of literature and the most noble arts, but also in painting, sculpture, and many other things which I now omit.
But to return to our matter, that relative of the Presuli of Spain , when he was leaving here for Rome, left me a note of books which the Reverend Father wished to have. I, however, eager to obey Sue's Dominion, after his departure have already procured so many, that he may now have the greater part of them at his disposal; and then I took care that the others were also present on his return, and informed him of all things. But since His Reverend Lordship has turned his mind to preparing this excellent collection of books, and I think it is his best will to express it with great praise, and I also think you should be congratulated, that you have the Lord so strongly attached to studies and letters and the most noble disciplines.
And concerning the matter of the illustrious man Nugni Guthman I undertook that care and thought which his virtues and his merits demand of me; and although it is very difficult to translate that Macrobius De Saturnalibus into the Tuscan language because of its material , I will take care, and I have already done my best to satisfy his desire. Nor (to inform him) did I receive any other letters about this matter: for I would have begun to pay attention to this matter long before, if I had first known his desire. For nothing can be more ancient to me, nor can anything seem more acceptable, than to behave according to his will, to whom I owe so much for his singular virtues and supreme offices in me, that his humanity may always be set before my eyes with a pleasant remembrance.
But as for the rest, I think you ought to be informed that James Pandolphinus , who will return these letters to you, is a young man of noble character, honest , upright, and of the best manners, and my best friend; he has four brothers, all educated in literature and connected with me by the greatest intimacy. In this matter, I beg you to do whatever you can, but you can favor him in many ways, and you would like to behave in a way that is for our friendship. But even if the Reverend Presul wanted to use it in translating books, he and his brothers are a man worthy of all trust, and if anything is relevant to the matter, they are also rich. Goodbye Florence , September 24, 1463 .

26
A great and noble man and so on.
I would have come here, if you hadn't told me, don't be satisfied, let's come, out of respect for the disease. Your Ethics <is> all over: if you want, send it to you, I will send it to you. <Manc> we have some examples to finish and books of the <Badia di Fiesole> ; and I was in San Marcho , and they say they can't lend them without your permission, under pain of excommunication. You liked to have the Prior make a police, lend them to me so that we can finish them. And books have started: please have it done and give it to the bearer of the present, so that these writers do not waste time. Coming to you as much as I can.

3
Vespasian greets Philip Podaghaterus Cyprius .
A few days ago I answered your letter, my Philippe. I am writing these things because I hear that the lives of Lycurgus and Nummus are elegantly converted . I want to have them. And if it be so as I understand it, I beseech your kindness to have the fusillade written by some one transcribe both, and inform me of the expense, which I will gladly pay. But I give you this work, relying on our friendship. You, in turn, use me as you please in all things, whom you will certainly find more ready than you think.
Goodbye I await the second letter.
30
To the most illustrious prince and most illustrious lord , after the humble recommendation, etc.
Adì 9 scripsi to your most illustrious Lordship of a worthy facto d'arme facto in Valachia: aretela <ha> vuta. Of new here are few worthy chose. Expect the dispatch of this peace from Rome, which, as you have understood, has extended it until the 15th, and will do the same in order to take time away from the league and have started to approve the Cardinals again. He seems to have little desire to have a conclusion, and if he can, he will do nothing . The only thing left is which way the Vintians are going: that if they have rectified, as there are letters from Rome, it is not a very good sign, because in principle when the Pope I published it, the principals of Venice rejoiced among themselves; then, when they saw that the league had not been amended, they began publicly to criticize it and say that the Pope had done wrong to publish it in this form. Having now moved to retify, he would be the opposite of what they have said, and it does not seem a very good sign of wanting peace. I doubt that the shortcomings of others make them more vigorous than by their nature they would not be, and please God that he will have a good end. If everyone had done what the Majesty of your father the King did, to make <e> <l>uthe provisions without going begging for peace, and whoever has waited to be asked of him by chance would have asked for it himself. At the league the choses are here and they can rather be taken back than amended, and we will soon see what the end will be.
The merchants come from Lyons and say the agreement of Philippo Monsigniore none havere efecto and that for everything he is said to be in agreement with the Ducha of Bo r ghognia : that if it were true none very good news, and it is per aventura one of those chose fa The Vinitians would have to stand still and take courage.
If the chord of the Turcho were followed which is neither similar to a place, they would be mounted in a place one could not with them.
When I hear what someone deigns, believing that doing what is grateful to your most illustrious Lordship , <I will do it> with a very good will. If my writing should seem long to you, as I have written several times to the King 's Majesty , place it in a singular faith and devotion I have in the state of His Majesty and of your illustrious Lordship , to which I commend myself as much as I can .

31
A very clear and eloquent man, after the foregoing recommendation, etc.
Through your Giuliano I was told this morning of the death of Nicienus and on your part that I would do nothing with the books of his Lordship so that you were notified of it . And there are ten volumes of books, as I told you on another occasion, in which are all the works of Sancto Augustino ; of which ten volumes on commission from his Lordship of which I gave nine on your commission to ser Nicholò ; the tenth volume remains in my hands, which must be illuminated and bound . I will not give the said book to anyone without your knowledge.
I would like you to work in every way so that the said books do not leave your hands and that they remain there, because in Italy this is not the most worthy thing. It took me three years and took a great deal of effort to carry them out, so that if I had to have them done again, it would be not only difficult but impossible. Having these ten volumes, all you need is De civitate Dei , which you have is very beautiful. Moreover, if some steward should happen to come to your house, you would not have to show anything similar to this for an unusual thing. So, use the usual diligence in this that you use in all your other choices, so that they remain there.
Lorenzo , the singular affection that I have always shown to all of your House makes me take the certainty of reminding you of those favors that you have to prove useful and honor. The more I think about it, the more it seems to me that the site of that library which I discussed on another occasion with your Magnificentia is a work worthy of you, because by not blaming anyone of your Passati, I hope that this one will be nothing inferior to those. I will also use to say this: that it has already been a long time since the most worthy invention of this one was made in Florence; and I do not discuss it with any of these who have some judgment who do not praise it infinitely. And I liked it so much that the Ducha of Chalavriaand to the Count of Urbino and to Signor Alexandro , who are very delighted with it, I have informed them of this decision of yours by my letters: who I know will praise it highly.
Take back what I am writing to you from Vespasian , who is no less zealous for your reputation and honor than for my own. I recommend to you.

32
A very clear and eloquent man, after a humble recommendation, etc.
Lorenzo , that I have been brought up in your house for thirty five continuous years, as I believe you are largely aware of - and I have always had recourse to your house for all my needs, from which I have always found favor in the right and honest choices ; now, since you are not here, a very sad incident has occurred to me, of which I am more accountable than ever since I was born. And this is that one Bartolomeo d'Antonio , who has been in our house for about twenty-five years or more, and on his death our brother he left him so many goods that would yield forty or more duchats and the return to the house until he took his wife, which were thirty or more, now, due to his chatter and bad habits, it is about a year since I got him fired, which I was bold enough to return to our house again, and if he had more reason to ask one thing than another. Now, since some of him remained in the house, I had one of my nephews tell him to come for them in his place. He replied that he would come when he wanted.
On the 23rd of this day, at 21 o'clock, since there was nothing but a slave in our house, he came with a bearer and by force entered the house, and he inspected two chasse, and chavonned what he thought and sent him away. After he had done it, he went to find one of the Ottos and told him that if I went there to regret what he had done, he sent for me immediately and told me what he had done. Going to the office of the Eight, when they were all informed, and saddened by the rudeness that had been done to me, which was a very bad example, and that it is a long time since there was never a greater rudeness than this in Florence.
Now, because I know how much the badly made and dishonest decisions displease you, of which this is one, I beg you that it pleases you, by the singular faith and hope I have in you, to have someone write either publicly or in particular, as it will seem to you better, to the said office and to ask me that the just and honest choices be right.
In doing so, as I hope and believe, I will place this at the foot of many obligations that I have at your request. I recommend you as much as I can.

36
Exhortation of Vespasian to Caterina de' Portinari , woman of Agnolo Pandolfini .
I don't know if, in starting to write to you, moved by singular love, I have always brought your husband Agnolo and his whole house, as it is something new and alien to me from my profession, and I know that there will be some who will perhaps blame me: nevertheless, I will use the the duty of the most faithful friend to remind you of his wife of all those things that are fitting for a most modest and most honest girl, that among mortals you may be glorious.
Many will be that in speaking and in the advice they will give you, all will be alien to what is fitting for the most modest girls: vanity, clothing, body ornaments; all things external and impertinent to modesty. It is a very probable opinion that there are few men or women who go straight to the true and just government and to what befits a very generous girl like you; although you were raised under your mother's discipline, which was always aimed at the path of inviolable virtue, as she demonstrated in her laudable behavior and while her husband lived and afterwards, remaining a young widow of not many years:
he wanted to stay in the state of most holy viduity and raised such a worthy family as he did with as much modesty and continentia as he lived and lives; she deserves to be honored, as San Pagolo says: Honor the widows' those who are true widows. You cannot excuse yourself from his example, because he has given you worthy of imitation in all degrees, both in marriage and in cowardice. Remember that not being born of very generous relatives nor adorning the body or face with smoothies taking up the figure that the omnipotent God made and wanting to transmute it: this is the duty of most women of our times and in this it is all their study full of vanity. You need to be adorned with modesty and honesty and many most holy works, so that you give thanks to your Creator, who not only created you for this perishable life, but for eternal life.
You won't fail to have someone to imitate besides your mother. Go to a house that has always been and is the ornament of men and women worthy of an example of our city. And I wish to God that people lived like this in other houses as they have always done in that one, how blessed they could be called! You still have as your example Agnolo's mother who has always been a mirror of honesty and continent. She remained young and beautiful in her body, on the death of her husband, with so many male and female children, and she has always lived with great continentia. She will be your mother. You will not depart from her advice and her opinions, as is convenient for you.
I will not put you before as an example, since you have these, Madonna Baptista de' Malatesta , a very singular woman who lived during the time of her husband, was an example to the whole world of very great honesty;
then dead, he gave part of his substantia to the poor, and in doing so he went to a monastery of most holy women and there he wanted to end his life in a most holy way. Nor will I put before you Madonna Cecilia della Casa da Gonzagha as beautiful in body as anyone of her age; she was married to a very great lord of Italy and in the time she was going to marry, she fled from the house of her father who was the Marquis of Mantua, and neither paternal nor maternal prayers could ever move her from her most holy purpose, but she remained in this most holy monastery all the time of her life and she wanted to be the least of all in everything, and she wanted to die there, esteeming her future life more than her present.
I will not put before you the most holy and immaculate virgin Catherina, whose name you bear on earth, who wanted to lay down her life to preserve her virginity. Nor will I say anything about the virgin Saint Lucilla, who to preserve her virginity took out her eyes and placed them in a basin and sent them to the one who desired them, saying: Here is the one you have loved. And in this way he made him confused. Nor will I tell you anything about Virgin Cicilia, who endured so many pains to keep herself intact and immaculate, as she did. Nor will I say anything about Reparata virgine, who being twelve years old, before the tyrant, promising him many treasures, replied: I am twelve years old; this transitory life I have seen is enough for me, but the
I say nothing of countless Christian women, who out of zeal for religion went to tyrants with their own children in their arms, and there they confessed the name of Christ and said they wanted to die for him; and so they did.
I won't say anything about the countless women hebbon the Jews, nor about the most holy Judith, nor the very strong Susanna: I will say nothing, to the confusion of the Christians. And if you realize that pagan women have had some virtues they are not in you, you will reproach yourself for those virtues, and in your mind awakens the shame that a pagan woman has defeated a Christian in morals, modesty and in constantia and in any other virtue you have surpassed yourself. Strive to overcome her just in your power! See: I say nothing about Portia, daughter of Cato and wife of Brutus, avenger of the Roman republic. Put before her eyes her modesty, her constancy, her inviolable faith and integrity which brought her husband Brutus to her; and had made a firm intention to be with him in any case,
And to demonstrate her steadfastness, I am not saying of the naked knife that in her husband's presence she passed her arm from one side to the other, telling him from then on to open his secret to him, that if the father had given it to him only for to be her company in the lecto and not in any case of fortune, which she would never have consented to. Nor will I say anything about this most constant lady, who, having told her of the death of her husband who had died in battle, immediately ran to the fire and took lighted coals and put them down his throat, and so wanted to die, seeing the man dead given his inviolable modesty. Nor will I put the example of the Roman Curia, a most modest and most faithful woman to her husband, who had such courage that, being confined,
and she never revealed it to anyone, but the better to hide it, she went to the senate, the forum and the squares recommending her husband to friends and relatives, and weeping bitterly in disarray, she recommended him, and in this way she saved him. That republic has had countless Roman women worthy of example and imitation.
Now you will put before your eyes those that seem more worthy of imitation and you will imitate them. Your inviolable soul and your chaste love for your husband you will preserve until your end and you will do what a most modest and most honest girl should do. There will be many who will tell you and your mother and you that you make various kinds of ornaments: who will tell you that you make ornaments on the arms, which were called armlets by the ancients; who will tell you that you make ornaments at the foot of the vestment, which were called after the ancients fimbriae and were used by the priests at the foot of the vestments; some will tell you about the ornament around the neck and some finger rings, that all are mortal and perishable things, which soon disappear.
You will take these teachings and examples of the sacred and the Gentiles, which will be the ornaments that I have set before you. They are pearls, rubies, balas, thopazii, diacinths and ismaraldi and diamonds; and the garments I have shown you are all full of gold, pearls and gems, which can be worn for all those who want them, and never for the death of any of your relatives do you need to get rid of it in this life; and after your end, dressed in the pallium of immortality, you will possess all these ornaments forever. The mortal garments and the joys you will have in this life, as earthly and mortal things, you will soon have to leave.
Therefore, take the perpetual and true ones, and leave the mortal and ephemeral ones. By doing so, you will be called blessed and happy in this life, and after your end you will be made heir to the supernal inheritance, together with the most immaculate virgins and the most chaste and most holy women.
37
Most illustrious Prince and Most Excellent Lord , after the humble recommendation, etc.
I haven't written to your Lordship for more time now, just seeing you in so many occupations of the sponge of Otranto. Now then it has pleased the most merciful God to have given you so much victory, it can be said that this victory not only belongs to the Majesty of the King and to Your Lordship, but of all the Christiani, since the offense was universal and not particular: however all the Christiani should rejoice in so much benefit received. In this city there could not have been greater rejoicing than has been done universally throughout the city with sounds and lights and processions to the most merciful God of so much benefit received. And this case is valued all the more when it is the universal judgment of all connoisseurs that not only in the time of the moderns, but of the ancients, the most worthy defense of this, nor the most powerful offense, was ever made. Because if Your Lordship consider what Numantia's offense was and what their defense was, where the Romans stayed in camp for a long time, there were no bombards or pushers or brooms or many species of war instruments that were in this city, and Numantia was not they bought only when those of the earth wanted. The same can be said of Sagunto, two such famous captures. Nor did the Greeks ever have any similar to this one, because you see Alexandro Magno, according to what Quintus Curtius writes, who, finding himself in a field in a town, threw himself walls in his own town where there were no shelters or anything. As can be seen of the moderns of our times, the Duke Francescohe went into the field at Gradara with a very powerful army, and after several months that he remained there he rose up in shame, and did not acquire it; and he was not defended in the form that Otranto was defended. It could be said of Verona when Duke Filippo bought it and that Nicolò Piccino entered it, who did it without any difficulty, where he was not injured or killed in person.
Then Duke Francesco came there, and since Duke Filippo did not send assistance to Nicolò Piccino , despairing and he and those of the earth, they put Duke Francesco inside , and without taking his sword from its sheath, he captured it. Here is the purchase of Brescia made for Count Carimignola : after a very long siege he bought it, but not with as much difficulty as your Lordship has bought . Duke Francesco went to camp in Milan, where there was a government without any order, and he stayed there for a longer time; then in the time that he was in utter despair, and it did not seem to him that he could buy it, he decided to get out of the field, finding himself in a very great mess of money and everything, and he had written letters about this here in Florence, which are from the Melanesians then without government and without individual order, due to the pride of the Venetians who did not want to take the lands of Lombardy with the conditions duke Filippo hadthe Melanesians became desperate because the Venetians had abandoned them and did not provide them with food or anything, and there was very great hunger; and all this the Venetians did, believing they had led him to a place where they were needed to give themselves up, and he made a mistake, because as if in despair, when Duke Francesco was completely in despair of the hope of having it, they called him inside and they told him yes . So this land he had without any difficulty.
If someone writes this assault in the way it was, and the difficulty was able to acquire it, and the defense was made by Your Lordship and the offense against the enemies, and it will be written in the proper way that it is, it will not be inferior neither to the deeds of the ancients, nor to those of the moderns, making a comparison of this with their deeds, as has been said.
Your Lordship remains in great glory and reputation, besides the universal good it will follow, because this can be said to have been done precisely by virtue and prudence of Your Lordship , that you have not forgiven either hardships or inconveniences, and put your person more times at the risk of one's life. I, as a servant of Your Lordship , have said and will say the same thing I wrote in several places; and as a servant of Your Most Illustrious LordshipI was as happy about it as I've heard about it for a very long time; and so I believe they have done all your servants, for the honor and reputation it follows to your Lordship , to which I commend myself as much as I can.
39
Although I have not written to you for the past time, nevertheless I have not forgotten the benefits received from the happy memory of your father Philippo , to whom I am greatly obliged, and to you as his worthy heir. I didn't want to make the mistake many make: of not recognizing the benefits received. Now having, as I believe you know, sent your father Philippo the Lives or commentaries of some worthy men, he has had your house, not inferior to any other house in Florence for as many singular men as it has had; having sent the Lives of those of your House, as is said, to Philippoyour father, it seemed to me that you are a worthy hereda you must participate in these vigils of mine made with so much effort.
Having made some lives of singular men , I have taken some of men who were in this age in very great status and conditions under several princes: which lives are of very well-known men and very close friends of the good memory of your Philippo father; and you will know for them how varied fortune has been in their lives, both in prosperity and in adversity. The first will be the life of miser Antoniello d'Aversa , who in your days was in very great state, then fortune turned to him, as you saw, by nature that he is and will be an example to the whole world . The other life is by Miser Mattheo Malferrita, which was highly valued by King Alphonso . The other will be the life of miserable Antonio Cicinello , who was as willing a gentleman as he has had the realm of Naples, and was well known to Philippo your father and held him in very great reverence. There will also be as an example of the varied fortune two lives of two singular men, who ruled the realm of England for a long time, the other governed the realm of Spain for forty years or more: the one from England was Meser John Duke of Ulsestri , the other was Alvaro di Luna , of natione catellana. And there is the life of Count Camerlingho , called MeserInicho de Davalos , born of a royal house, who was of the kindest gentlemen possessed in the realm of Naples and was very well known to Philippo your father.
And because, as Philippo and all those known, they found themselves at the time when the King 's Majesty defeated Duke Giovanni at Troy, whence they wanted to acquire the kingdom freely from him - and because in this feat of arms there was Captain Mr. Alesandro Sforza , it seemed to me to put his life in this last one where everything related to arms is narrated, which was a very dignified thing: and you know in this arms fact and the prudence of the King 's Majesty in taking the side seized, and the great expertise of mister Alesandro 's military discipline. All things are written in leFastI received part of the above mentioned from my own persons, and the others from men most dignified of faith.
I have not been able to show you my affection for you in any other way than to send you these Lives and do what I can to make you immortal with the memory of the letters. Although in me there is no eloquence that would be fitting for such a worthy work, none the less no one can give if he does not have what he has. So I have not been able to give you anything other than these brief commentaries on Lives , as you will see, which have already been transcripted and in the near future I will have them completely finished and I will send them: which you will keep in memory of the friendship I have maintained with Philippo your father and the like in you, as it is said, his worthy hereda.

4
Vespasian Joannius of Mount Tabur greetings.
I have lately received your letter, which I do not know what could have been more kindly received by me . For I understand how great is your benevolence towards me, so that your mind is ready to comply with my wish, for which indeed I give you immortal thanks. But I was informed by them that the creation of the Cardinals was an obstacle to your visiting the Holiness of Our Lord ; for everything was disturbed, and neither the Writers nor the Signers were yet received at home. And these documents are of such a kind, that I do not know whether it is wiser to hope than to fear . God bless our affairs. But you, from the second letter, make me feel something about the business of both. Sir Johnand I told the rest of my friends both about the letter and about your business what you desired, but he asserts that he sent the letter. Of the cardinals whom you write, they are most agreeable to me: for they are considered the most approved and worthy men who should be assumed to such a position .
Goodbye I highly recommend myself and my business to you.

5
Domino Ghuiglelmo Grain.
Reverend in Christ my most singular father and lord, I recently had a letter from Nicholas Xaston , which, though always grateful to me, was certainly very agreeable, not only because they pleased me enough for his love for me, but also because I know that your Lordship is very strong. in which nothing can be sweeter to me. But what he writes is that you have been in continuous occupations and important business, and I hope that your affairs will succeed from my wish, if so I shall rejoice not moderately; for I understand that I am entirely situated among you, and that my fortune, either secondary or adverse, depends on your fortune and dignity.
I sent the works of Tertullianus and Athanasius and Gregorius Nazanzeni written on papyrus with the previous letters, which I think you already had. I look forward to knowing your purpose concerning Plutarch's Vine and other works. Here nothing else remains to be done, except the rest of Laertius Diogenes , which will be completed shortly. I highly commend myself to you.

6
Messer Gianozzo Manetti to Vespasiano , greetings.
It is more than I received one from you, to which I was unable to reply beforehand because of the many and varied public occupations of this blessed city of ours, which the more I flee, the more they run after me. And in these things I would also like to gratify God, to whom I am sure you like them greatly, and to satisfy myself and the debt that I feel I owe to my country, since I will beget it, God forgive him, that she gave me and gives and will always give bigha; and I have done, do and will do during my life the opposite to her sine intermissione, although he seems to be certain that I have no other rank or other merit than he used to. Yet nevertheless I hope and trust in the eternal judgequi non mentitur, et retribuet unicuique secundum sua opera, et qui scrutatur corda et renes, Deus .
And for this reason I am spending a lot of time not to leave behind anything that belongs either to the dignity of any magistrate I may have, or to any commission I may have received. And when I was one of the Ottos at the time of the other Priors , I made several tests, because in truth at that time our office governed everything; and then, at the time of the present, I still had about the ordination the Commune took de facto much trouble and annoyance . And therefore I beg you, excuse me for not having answered you earlier.
You apologize for not having written to me earlier, which is actually very kind and directly oratory. And although you are endowed with a good ingenuity more than is required of your art and profession, I none the less believe that you took it more from artifice than from nature: which I like very much, because I mean that in one stroke you make a journey and several services, because you flee death by consoling yourself with friends and learn kind things from these gharzoni, who in truth are a couple which is, as the poet says, rara avis in terris nigroque simillima cigno . Preterea you learn that art that makes its professors advance other men. Hoc enim, ut inquit Cicero,prestamus vel maxime feris: quod loquimur inter nos et quod exprimere saying sensi possumus. Et alibi verba hec ponit: Ac mihi quidem videntur homines, cum multis rebus humiliores et infirmiores sint , hac re maxime bestiis presta: quod loqui possint. Quare preclarum mihi quiddam videtur adeptus qui, qua re bestiis homines prestent, ea in re hominibus ipsis antecellat .
So I rejoice with you in all these comforts of yours, and I pray God to keep them for you, increase them and give you long consolation; and I encourage you to continue in your good and laudable intention.
You say you didn't write to me even though you had and wanted and desired it only because when you considered having to write to me, whom you consider so learned and so worthy, that you doubted it wasn't imputed to you for presuming to write to me ; and you also had suspicions of not satisfying me by writing to me. To which I reply that, although I know that this is a gentle rhetorical colour, nevertheless when it is not as you write, you know very well that we are friends, and that good friendship, such as I believe ours is, cannot be nisi inter pares. So, although by chance I found myself having a few prelations more than you in eruditionis et doctrine, none the less in respect of our friendship between us, I understand everything. And even if I had the opinion of me that you write which could be more likely due to the great and singular affection that you have shown and bear for me, than in other respects I thank you and remain very obliged. Facis enim friend. Enough of this part.
To the other where you ask me to let you know who was first, Moysè or Homero , I reply that, although of the homeland and of the times precisely
of Homer's birth various and different opinions are given by Greek and Latin scriptors, none the less he is certainly supputata temporum ratione, que quidem, ut inquit Hyeronimus, chronicle historia continetur which Moysè was long before Homer, according to whatever opinion one might have times of his birth. And note the clear reason that comes from Eusebius De temporibus , which comes from the book of Genesis: Moysè was born after the creation of the world around 3600, a cuius quidem nativitate usque ad captivitatem Troiethey are about 410 years old, because the captivity of Troy was in four thousand and ten a creatione mundi; and Homero in his Yliade writes of the beautiful Trojan, de obsidione urbis et de eius captivitate, so it was agreed that it was necessarily later, when as a poet similar to the historico for in that poem he is mezo historico describit bellica Grecorum et Troianorum gesta. It is therefore necessary to know that Moysè was before Homero , and for this reason it seems to me that I have satisfied your request.

But, if you wished how long the birth of Moysè preceded that of Homer, I tell you that this is more difficult, due to the various and different opinions that the writers have on it, which perhaps are not less in number than those who write about it. his homeland, because not only those of whom Tullio mentions in the oration Pro Archia poëta, but also seven cities contend for Homer's homeland. Et Tullio mentions only four of his verbis:
Homerum Colofonij civem esse dicunt suum, Chij suum vindicant, Salaminij repetunt, Smirnei vero suum esse confirmant; permulti alij preterea pugnant inter se atque contendunt . And among the Greeks we find the variety of seven cities, as I have said. Bocchaccio in his Geneologie makes express mention of it, and counts it in these two verses, tracts of I don't know what Greek poet: Samos, Smirne, Chios, Colofon, Pilos, Argos et Athene de Homeri patria, contendunt . And so that you can consider which is greater or lesser variety of the scriptori or of the country or of his nativity, I will put before you the words that Eusebius writes in the book De temporibus, cuius hec verba sunt:Quodam commemini codices loco Pyrrus Delphis in templo Apollinis ab Horeste occiditur proditione preteris Macarei, quo tempore quidam Homerum fuisse dicunt . Et little further down about 50 years he writes in this form:Anno mundi octuagesimo millesimo quarto - that in 4080 Homerus, secundum quorundam opinionem, his fuisse temporibus vindicatur. Quanta vero de eo apud veteres dissonantia fuerit, manifestum esse potentiit ex sequentibus. Quidam eum ante descensum Heraclidarum ponunt, Aristoteles post centesimum annum Troiane captivitatis, Aristarcus Jonica emigratione sive post annos centum, Phiheorus emigrationis Jonice tempore sub Arseippi Atheniensium magistratu et post captam Troiam anni centum octuaginta, Apollodorus Atheniensis post ducentesimumbquadragesimum annum eversionis Ylij. Extiterunt alij qui modico tempore antequam Olimpiades inciperent, quadringentesimo circiter Troiane captivitatis anno, eum fuisse putent,.
Haec Eusebius. Ex quibus palam et apreciate Moysem longe Homericae nativitatis tempora precessisse et non minorem forte diverserum Opinionis veterum scriptorum varietatem de nativitate quam de patria di lui extitisse colligitur. For if the aforesaid seven cities contend among themselves over Homer's homeland, likewise you will find seven various opinions of his birth, as it clearly appears above.
Now I have written to you quickly and without too much consideration, and therefore I doubt I will not have satisfied you as well as you would like. Put it to the occupations, quibus undique tanquam molibus et obicibus quibusdam opprimor; sed Deus, ut Spero, qui non deseritsperantes in se, adiutor erit in tribulationibus quae varie et omnifariam hinc inde circumferuntur. Et habbi patientia to the length of the letter, with which I wanted to compensate for the delay in replying.


