1
Donato Acciaioli to Vespasiano greetings.
Vespasiano my sweetest, the letters that you sent us through Andrea the painter were all very grateful and joyful to us, but certainly more grateful we would have been for your arrival, which we all awaited with great joy: which is why we are very sorry that your occupations have prevented us and robbed us of a little consolation for your return. And your thanks are in no way appropriate; rather that we should be to blame for not doing what your humanity deserved. Fucci good spirit and good will: why I think you apologized.
Of the praises you write about me in your letter, certainly the desire and the love - which often makes false judgments much 'nghanna; because you think those virtues are in your Donato , which I am sure you would wish they were.
Nothing else happens in the present, except that Christo keep you and send you back to us soon. I have written these few verses with the pen of silver, which was very grateful to me together with the quills.
41
Dear brothers and sisters. I have already written and corrected all of Plato's Phedone that you lent me , and I lack to write: why, taking the security used in you, I most earnestly ask you to make me have, if possible, the Gorgias or the Epistles sue, or almancho el Thimeo , that is, he has translated himself for Messer Leonardo. You will be the reason that I don't waste time, because up here I enjoy writing no less than reading, and it seems to me that I have leftover everything that I do there. And the sooner you send it to me, the more I will be obliged to you. And give it, for the less of your trouble, to Andrea Comber, who lives in Piero Acciaioli 's little house and who will perhaps give you this letter, because he often comes to see us. It is young to entrust everything to him. Please let me know if this is anything new, and what follows from the study, because everything will be very welcome to me. I will send you some becchafichi , if there are any.
But this year we have seen very few of them, and a great many here up among these little hills where the wind can blow a lot. You will therefore have patience, like us. The offers of coming to see us have already been made several times; el put to executione is now up to you.
For my part , give my regards to Jacopo de' Rossi and Domenico di Carlo , and in primis my Ser Pellegrino . And ask me at Goro da Legnaia as much as you can . Nor anything else for this one. Dominus tecum.
