13
Having answered one of yours in the past few days, it did not bother me for the present to have you writing, if a horrible accident had not occurred again, of which I intend to give you news by its brevity.
On Saturday the 4th of this day, at about the 11th in the night, in a quiet time without any other previous sign, a frightful tremor occurred, which was of such a nature that it astounded every man, and proceeded with much damage both here in the earth and outside throughout, in a circuit space of about 70 miles, and lasted for the space of two friars' Misereri.
The damno that he has done here is universal, that neither church nor secular building has not been greatly offended, because many churches have been smashed, some ruined, the walls bald. Those that have received less damage are found with tecti disfacti et co' champanili on the ground. Of the great palaces I tell you the same. The castle of Santremo, which is next to the church of Certosa and overlooked the town, is ruined; the aforesaid monastery <has> received much damage, and in various places of the earth about a hundred people are found dead.
The scourged places are many outside the city. And leaving the farmhouses and the villas, I will only tell you about the castles and the lands. The land Nola, Sant'Aghata, La Palude, La Cava, Sansoverino, Salerna, Benevento, Troia, Aversa, Capua, Arriano up to Sessa, Gaeta: all the places it has found in these circumstances it has inflicted various, and in fact various, damages according to the weakness and site of the places, because part of the aforesaid lands has been destroyed by the walls, part ruined by houses and part collapsed with great killing of many people.
This impetus was carried on as far as Foggia, which is a city in Apulia, where the King 's Majesty was located and most of the court in more than 2,000 cavalry, but it did no harm.
The brigade remained all astounded between the fragello received and the suspicion that the others did not come; but, by the grace of God, no more came than two others so small, that they did no harm. As a remedy, wait not for the past disaster, which was inestimable and irreparable damage, but for the suspicion of the future, to lodge in the countryside, and go day and night in universal procession.
We, by the grace of God, are all saved; but we were astounded, no more than thrushes that have had copper in their beaks. Let us strive to do well, and turn to God with prayers, and with devotion, we will commend ourselves to Him in whom us manu sunt sortes nostra et presentes et future.
At your pleasure. May Christo take a bad look at you.

14
Messer Giannozo Manetti , greetings to Vespasiano .
Since in the past days I wrote to you about the great crash of a frightening and unusual tremor, which appeared on Saturday the 4th of this day, at nocte, in about 11 hours, in a large part of this country, with so much damage from the ruins of houses, of palaces, of churches, of flooding of lands, of castles and of cities, and with a very great killing of men, I received yours with the information of the gestures of our messer Giannozo Pandolfini . And having understood your desire and the request you make of me to write a funeral oration, I praise you and commend the singular affection you have shown to his customs and virtues.
And because I find myself in a similar degree of affection, I am happy to take the effort of writing, both to satisfy the debt of affection I brought him, and also to please you, considering the manner of the request you make me. However, I understood the information sent to me.
But because they are things to be written with some dignity, otherwise they would have the opposite effect on the drawing if one makes them, I would like you to inform me of two things among others: the first, of the time when he was born; and the second, of the name of his wife; And so even if it seems to you that you have left behind anything worthy of memory. And as soon as I get the information, I will send you the script in such a form that I think I can show you and anyone else the uniqueness of the affection I had for him, as you will see from experience.
At your pleasure. May Christo take a bad look at you.

15
Come with honor, fratello, and the rest. How much do I consider the laudable condition of my beloved donna?, the more I regret having lost it; and the greater affection I had for her, the more burning is the pang of loss; and the more damage my family suffers from it, the more it torments me to know that I have lost it. And nevertheless, because these cases are natural and have no other remedy than to bear them patiently, I will endeavor to bring myself under this yoke. Although it is very difficult to do so in the beginning, nevertheless I will try to do it, because I know that it is a great advantage to do it in time to linger. And one thing is that which, besides the others, greatly comforts me: and this is to die with excellent knowledge and with a manly spirit to the point of passing: which is a grace in those cases to be recognized only by God. soon I will leave,
Et prieghoti che attenda un poco a confortare Agnolo, quando lo vedi. Et racchomandoti strettamente il mio Giovannino. Et a Pandolfo mi scuserai del non fare risposta alla sua, perché mi truovo in brighe et in occhupationi assai. Che attenda come gli pare alla emendatione di quella oratione funebre in quelle parti dove gli pare che n'abbi bisogno, ché alla sua discretione la rimetto. A' piacer tuoi. Che Christo di male ti guardi.

27
It was most gratifying to have understood those for your de 8 of the present ne havite scripto; however, since no other reply will come to you, we will not further lengthen it in writing to you. Solum for the present we thank you and comfort you to keep us informed with your usual diligence of the things <that> in the past happen from there.

8
Come with honor, fratello and others. Ne' dì passati receivetti una tua de dì 2 di questo, la quale mi die' et piacere et consolatione assai, perché clearly compresi quanta era l'affectione tua verso di me, scrivendo si tenderamente et con tanta carità quanto fai. For a long time ago, while reading, I came across that worn-out proverb, by which it is usually said and preached that the mouth speaks out of the abundance of the heart .
Thank you for such affection. Né altro per al presente ti posso fare che offererti di risponderti in questa benevolentia colla medesima carità; direi maggiore, se io vi credessi potere aggiugnere, perché io cognosco sarei obligato ad farlo non otherwise che cholui che prima receive il beneficio, il quale, secondo la sententia de' philosophie, è oblighato a renderne uno maggiore che quello che receivette. But so far, especially between us, whose true and ancient friendship has long since been approved and confirmed by many and various experiences .
I have understood and savored all the parts of your aforesaid letter, to which I do not need to make any other response, other than to praise and thank God for it, and to ask him to grant us so much of his grace, that we may preserve this holy work of peace. to which I am very well disposed to do anything and everything, the little time I have to stay, that I wish to get away soon, because I have several important matters that continually pull me. I hope things will go well.
De facto Ser Giovanni d'Aversa gave himself the commission to the ambassadors and made him the commission <that> you know. And because I have seen a letter that Francho writes to Bartolomeo Serragli , in which he tells him more things (among other things he says that the fact of him is totally doomed), however I didn't seem to give myself any further trouble.
Request me to messer Agnolo and to compare Dietisalvi , and greet Piero and Donato on my behalf. I am at your pleasure. Christo evil look at you.


