11
On your day, the 15th of this, a brief reply occurs. And to the point that it has been a month since you have not received any letters from me, I am very surprised, because I have written you several: one I know has been done a bad service. I sent you under that of Agnolo , I sent you for a chavallaro of the ambassadors who has the name of Ciechiajo. And although, when the ambassadors were there, I spent a lot of time keeping them constantly company, it is not that the evening did not leave me so much that I was able to make up for the letters of my friends. And even if I miss it, it would not remain that I do not always reply to yours, because truly, not only do I not regret writing to you, but I take a singular pleasure and comfort from it.
Et accepto the offer you make me of the requested books of the Bible et De Vita Patrum . Do it, I beg you, and it will please me very much.
But not mentioning Avicenna does not seem to me a good sign in medicine. Make sure that I have it in every way, that I have nicist of it. And so if a Paolo Orosio and Euclid's Geometry had you . And I will see to it that you will have My Lives , which are 5 in one volume, which I received a few days ago from Monsignore di Fermo . If you can't get them from there, I'll write about them to Agnolo , and with his reply I'll send them to you, if you don't plow them from Agnolo .
And since among the other letters I wrote to you, which you say you did not receive, there was one that contained two parts, I will repeat them to you for this one. The first, of the stationers' half ducat : and I concluded that it was to be put aside, for the answer Francesco had given me , the effect of which was that of many books that had sold you and had never gained anything with you; and that at two bolognini per ducato , as is given here, they would remain owed a lot from you.
I told him my opinion, and it helped little. But I later spoke about it with Giovanni and with him together, and I showed them what they are doing you wrong and are doing against themselves. I believe they will still be able to withdraw a half ducat , in case they redeem one which they say they will still have. Use little diligence and be careful. And because I wrote to you for Tomaso that you would get 5 ducats from these men of mine and I didn't pay half of the book, and three to Messer Dieciaiuti , as you wrote, believing you had them in your hands, you want to see that I have them back.
The other: that the friendly relative of our friend would do nothing, although the common opinion was to the contrary, because he had written after his tracta to the aforesaid friend, and the friend had conferred it with me. So give yourself good will for this, that you will see with effect what I have told you and say to you.
At your pleasure. May Christo take a bad look at you.
Do not forget the books and Avicenna , and answer me something.
And if you can send me none for Tomaso , who will be leaving from town a few days in December, do so, I await him eagerly.
12
greetings to Vespasiano .
The first and only of our men that I noticed how I was in agreement with the Majesty of the King was you, with whom I gladly communicated all my matters of greater importance; and so it is my intention to persevere for the future, even though I am absente, for the faith and charity that I have always found in you. And yet I am sorry that the service that I desired was not done with the letter. Still, since you've had it, I'm happy about it.
I expect that you have kept the books I asked for from you, and so I desire that you satisfy a desire that has come to me: to have good texts with glosses on civil and canonical reasoning . But I warned you that I would like them good and with the comments . But I would like to have some, and I cherish the notice you give me to have some good ones in both faculties , and especially Messer Valasco . And therefore with regard to this part I conclude that you make sure that I have them as a reasonable value and with some pleasure, for which I will remain singularly obliged to you. And yet I would like you to find me a good writer . Just do it,
I was very pleased that Piero would take the security of myself in giving the commission to buy those two volumes of Celsus and the Epistole ad Atticum , and pay the price as it seemed to me, because I wish to oblige him in whatever possible way. However, as soon as Giovanni Tornabuoni sent me the message on his part, we went to the workshop of Giovanni and Francesco cartolai, and we found that they didn't have the Epistole , but Cornelio , and he was to see who was giving them ducats 18 . Let's recover. And not wanting less than22 ducats , I bought it with Matteo Baroncegli who takes care of selling it to him, and reduced it to 20 ducats per room , and so it was bought.
And although it seems a little expensive, none the less the volume and quality make it beautiful and good and sift it. And we searched and investigated the Epistles so much that we find them in the hands of Ambruogio Spannochia , who has pledged them from the Archbishop of Spalatro, nephew who was the Vice- Chancellor ; and they cannot be sold without his permission. And although Giovanni and I know everything about Piero , nevertheless it seems useful to me that you tell him what is contained in this chapter.
At your pleasure. May Christo take a bad look at you.

22
Dearest Vespasians and so on. I have yours on the 14th of May and the new ones are free for me and you write to me. All I have to do here is to warn you again, except that in the past there was a worthy acto et solemne. Our Lord sent Cardinals and ambassadors for all and many bishops and prelates and the auditors of Ruota; and made every man sit in 'places of him, and' was paraded in pontifical. Then he summoned the Aquilani ambassadors, to whom, kneeling in the middle of that congregation, he told them that they were to hear some things that would be read to them, and then he would tell him his intention.
A trial and sentence was read, which mainly contained the actual chapters of the truce, and following the chapters that they had of their cattle with the customs here.
Subsequently it was shown that for many things, which had been made by time, a truce was made in qua, and then they had the security and chapters of the customs office, which had rocti said chapters to receive Count Joannito give favor to the enemies of the Church; for which matters they were rebellious and all security was lost. And he had the reasons that they could allegate to the contrary put in the said trial and they could not be moved, and he sent them all to the ground and resolved whatever could be raised. He then had the sentence of the auditors of Ruota read out, who, having examined all these things, had judged that their livestock had been lost, and that they belonged and must be confiscated from the Apostolic Chamber. And he asked the auditors of Ruota, and which ones were present, if they agreed with this judgement, and they all affirmed so.
This done, Our Lord spoke and said: «You have understood the sentence that the auditors of Ruota gave with diligent examination; and their judgment is not vulgar judgment, but it is that which universally judges all and Christians. And according to justice, the livestock, as you can see, belongs to the Apostolic Chamber. And there are many reasons that urge me to follow this path of justice, and on the other hand there are many that urge me to mercy.
The ones that move me, exhort me, incite me to justice are these: your pride and ignorance, which you do not remember that you are subjects of the Holy Church, licet mediate, and you must obey that and the princes that she sets before you . And you have done the opposite to this, that you have risen up against what you understand to be the will of Holy Church, and you have rebelled against the one she has crowned King , against whom you areproceeded to continuously give provisions and shelter to your enemies and with your means and even with your own blood. Move us once again your ingratitude to have to follow this judgment and justice, because you do not remember many great and excellent benefits received from the Holy Church, and many could be reduced to memory. But it suffices only to remind you of this: that the help and favor of Holy Church freed you from the obsession of hunger and from the servitude of the most cruel and superb captain of Braccio; and it was not the Casa di Colonna that liberated you, but it was the Holy Church: as if we were to liberate you at present, it would not be the Casa de' Piccoluomini, but it would be the Holy Church. And we can also recall it because we already see that you have put it into oblivion that I smoke, happy with the previous year, to remove our army and put back any mistake committed. And therefore your ingratitude and ignorance, as I said, moves us to do justice. On the other hand <we are> induced to mercy, I had respect mainly for this Solio, and next to what is convenient of the Pontificate, and wishing to imitate the custom of my predecessors.
And therefore, considering more what is convenient of us than what your errors deserve and those you have fictitious in the past, and the proxies that you have boldly made against Sermona; and he had respect for your people, who we know do not voluntarily commit this error, because by their nature and peoples they are good, but they are forced by the scandalous and disturbers of peace and quiet; Moved therefore by these reasons, we are happy to show mercy and mercy towards your people, and to forgive you, give you and free your cattle, hoping that in the future you will sometimes follow the true light. And even if you wish to persevere in your iniquity and pertinacity, with the help of the
The Aquilan ambassadors responded briefly to these words, thanking His Holiness . It was a worthy act, with respect to the presence and celebrity of many prelates and lords and the pontifical apparatus, and with respect to the oration of Our Lord which was very elegant.
I have nothing else to tell you from here. About the matter Pandolfo writes me , I will answer them for one of my questions in full. The King was to go out into the fields this week and go to the countryside of Sexa. I'm studying diligently what I have to do, but this one is called Corte and it's long, and it's starting to be hot and very dusty.
The Pope is going to Albano tomorrow to stay with the Camarlingho , whom he has put in order so that it would be enough for one of those ancient emperors, and in fact chambers and chambers of branches and flowers. I won't tell you anything about the silverware and other equipment! I intend to go there one evening, and I will return to Tusculano to the place of Niceno . And nor anything else.
Of the fact of d' Albert , the writer of May, you gave me no answer, neither you nor Ser Griso .
