44
The angel says his greatest greeting to Vespasian. Although I had nothing at all to write to you, I could not make use of the silence of letters with you, lest, according to the opinion of Aristotle, the length of silence should dissolve the friendship of both of us. For it is an old opinion of the said Philosopher to dissolve many friendships in silence. What then shall I write to you, having nothing to write? I have only written this, which I have purposely put at the beginning of this letter, lest you, being preoccupied with many other things, should neglect the memory of my absence, and therefore consign it to oblivion. Therefore, most kindly Vespasian, please be mindful of me, as I am mindful of you.
45
The angel says his greatest greeting to Vespasian.
In regard to your letter which I have lately received, desirous of replying to my impressions, and, therefore, in a way and in an appropriate manner, to one who thinks very much, three things seemed perhaps worthy of a reply. For the first was about the excuse of your inexperience, the second about the praise of my doctrine, the third about my remembrance of your person.
When, therefore, I would like to answer all these very briefly, to the first point about inexperience, I would say that it is so far away that your letter admits that you are uninformed, which also testifies that you are far more skilled and refined than I had ever imagined before.
As for the second part of my learning, I say, see how much your kindness towards me has driven you to err. For you do not know that I was thoroughly inexperienced and ignorant of literature, and almost a child, and that a little before I was summoned by chance from the childish game of arithmetic to the knowledge of the first elements. But if there were anything of real praise in me, which I admit to be none, it would surely be—unless I am mistaken about myself—a certain and inexhaustible eagerness for reading.
To the third, where you exhort me to be mindful of you, I could truly promise and swear to you, if it is free, that you easily obtained all this from me without any precepts. For I love you alone, and I keep the memory of you, like my friend, preserved in my heart and mind forever and ever.

7
Messer Giannozzo Manetti was greeted by Vespasian.
It cannot be said, most sweet Vespasian, how much I delight in your learning, and how much I desire you to become wise; she alone makes her worshipers, and the living, the most worthy men of all men, and the dead also, endowed with the integrity of life, makes the wretched and the dead happy and immortal. Accordingly, I read your letters with the greatest enthusiasm, since they seemed to contain and presuppose a particular taste of divine things.
For two ambiguities, as far as we could understand and perceive from a careful reading of the aforesaid letters, arose from our answers to you about children who died before Baptism.
Do you think that the salutary death of our Lord Jesus Christ was so precious that it could cleanse and save the little ones, although they were only contaminated by the original corruption, who, according to that celebrated sentence of the Gospel, had sinned neither against the Father, nor against the Son, nor even against the Holy Spirit? We, therefore, desiring to behave respectfully and politely to you, our excellent and special friend, will briefly answer your aforesaid questions. For we would be shown a very broad field in which to traverse, if we were willing to embellish this very thing a little more widely, and to explain it more richly in oratorical fashion; . If, therefore, in so many and so great matters, as we have said, we shall answer you briefly, and neither, as I think, shall we satisfy ourselves. Indeed, they cannot be treated concisely and neatly at the same time.
But of these other things. Now let's get to your questions briefly.
We grant that the merit of the Passion of Christ was as great in itself as can be imagined.
For it is evident that he existed only in order to redeem all men previously condemned by original sin without any hesitation, and to save the redeemed; I mean all men, whosoever had lived well and righteously by the natural law, or had been prepared by the written and old by circumcision, or by the evangelical and new by baptism, by their precepts and sacraments, unless there had already been little ones and infants, to whom alone before the giving of the law divine and infinite kindness, and afterwards Circumcision, and, finally, Baptism, from the great and innumerable merits of the Christian Passion, seemed to be sufficient for their perpetual and eternal salvation. Indeed, all men of whatever age died in the grace of God, in a certain place separated from other criminals and lost mortals, until the precious gallows of our Lord; We know from the sacred reading that they were placed in a certain receptacle of the blessed spirits. After all, after the writings of the old and new laws, we believe that our Lord's Passion, so salutary and so precious, benefited no one who had not observed any of the old and new laws, at least Circumcision and the sacramental precepts of Baptism. But since we understand that children who die without Baptism have by no means fulfilled the first sacraments of the new law, we grant that the aforesaid death of Christ could not have benefited them in any way.
And it will suffice to answer your first question more briefly than I would have liked in this way. As for the second, concerning the evangelical authority for a certain apology and defense of the deceased little ones alleged by you, we will answer very briefly. Accordingly, we think that this very thing must be understood of actual sin, and not of original sin, and thus explained. Although infants who have died before Baptism have sinned neither against the Father, nor against the Son, nor against the Holy Spirit, which we readily grant, it does not seem to follow from this that they have escaped the original corruption; they are not believed to be condemned undeservedly, unless either divine kindness, or Circumcision, or Baptism has already prevented their utterly miserable and unhappy death, as we explained more extensively and richly in our letter, which we wrote to you about these matters elsewhere, and mentioned a little above. And we had the following to answer your questions briefly. In which case, if perhaps we have not done enough for you, as we think and believe it will be, I would like you to attribute it in vain to the opinion of ignorant and cowardly men, to whom it is sometimes necessary to yield and submit to the ancient sages.
Et se così è, abbi patience so much that with a living voice I can restore you, and then we will supply abundantly from every stain.
And I hope it will be ready, because il nostro Agnolo Bald 
Yes and I have decided to come and see you and stay there one day with you, when he has returned from Mugello. And I gladly give you every respect, and especially to meet up a little with Dietisalvi, who I beg you to greet and comfort on my behalf in that way and in that form, it seems to you, that he requires the laudable conditions of his person and the singular affection which, as you know, I bring them. He is worth et me ut facis he loves.
